<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXXI: The Initiate</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-31" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">XXXI</h2>
				<p epub:type="title">The Initiate</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>You may, perhaps, have wondered why a man so full of human failings, and set in so unheroic a mould as Master Nathaniel Chanticleer should have been cast for so great a role. Yet the highest spiritual destinies are not always reserved for the strongest men, nor for the most virtuous ones.</p>
			<p>But though he had been chosen as Duke Aubrey‚Äôs deputy and initiated into the Ancient Mysteries, he had not ceased to be in many ways the same Master Nathaniel as of old‚ÅÝ‚Äîwhimsical, childlike, and, often, unreasonable. Nor, I fear, did he cease to be the prey of melancholy. I doubt whether initiation ever brings happiness. It may be that the final secret revealed is a very bitter one‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ or it may be that the final secret had not yet been revealed to Master Nathaniel.</p>
			<p>And, strange to say, far from being set up by his new honours, he felt oddly ashamed of them‚ÅÝ‚Äîit was almost as if he was for the first time running the gauntlet of his friends‚Äô eyes after having been afflicted by some physical disfigurement.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>When things had returned again to their usual rut, Master Ambrose came to spend a quiet evening with Master Nathaniel.</p>
			<p>They sat for some time in silence puffing at their pipes, and then Master Ambrose said, ‚ÄúTell me what your theory is about Endymion Leer, Nat. He was a double-dyed villain, all right, I suppose?‚Äù</p>
			<p>Master Nathaniel did not answer at once, and then he said thoughtfully, ‚ÄúI suppose so. I read the report of his defence, however, and his words seemed to me to ring true. But I think there was some evil lurking in his soul, and everything he touched was contaminated by it, even fairy fruit‚ÅÝ‚Äîeven Duke Aubrey.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúAnd that spiritual sin he accused himself of‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ what do you suppose it was?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI think,‚Äù said Master Nathaniel slowly, ‚Äúhe may have mishandled the sacred objects of the Mysteries.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWhat are these sacred objects, Nat?‚Äù</p>
			<p>Master Nathaniel moved uneasily in his chair, and said, with an embarrassed little laugh, ‚ÄúLife and death, I suppose.‚Äù He hated being asked about these sorts of things.</p>
			<p>Master Ambrose sat for a few moments pondering, and then he said, ‚ÄúIt was curious how in all his attacks on you he defeated his own ends.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYes,‚Äù cried Master Nathaniel, with much more animation than he had hitherto shown, ‚Äúthat was really very curious. Everything he did produced exactly the opposite effect he had intended it should. He feared the Chanticleers, and wanted to be rid of them, so he gets Ranulph off to Fairyland, whence nobody had ever before returned. And he manages to get me so discredited that I have to leave Lud, and he thinks me safely out of the way. But, in reality, he was only bringing about his own downfall. I have to leave Lud, and so I go to the farm, and there I find old Gibberty‚Äôs incriminating document. While the fact of Ranulph‚Äôs having gone off yonder sends me after him, and that is why, I suppose, I come back as Duke Aubrey‚Äôs deputy,‚Äù and again he gave an embarrassed laugh; and then added dreamily, ‚ÄúIt is useless to try and circumvent the Duke.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚Äú‚Ää‚ÄòHe who rides the wind needs must go where his steed carries him,‚Äô‚Ää‚Äù quoted Master Ambrose.</p>
			<p>Master Nathaniel smiled, and for some minutes they puffed at their pipes in silence.</p>
			<p>Then Master Nathaniel gave a reminiscent chuckle: ‚ÄúThose were queer months that we lived through, Ambrose!‚Äù he cried. ‚ÄúAll of us, that‚Äôs to say those of us who had parts to play, seemed to be living each others‚Äô dreams or dreaming each others‚Äô lives, whichever way you choose to put it, and the most incongruous things began to rhyme‚ÅÝ‚Äîapples and bleeding corpses and trees and ghosts. Yes, all our dreams got entangled. Leer makes a speech about men and trees, and I find the solution of the situation under a herm, which is half a man and half a tree, and you see the juice of fairy fruit and think that it is the dead bleeding‚ÅÝ‚Äîand so on. Yes, my adventures went on getting more and more like a dream till‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ the climax,‚Äù and he paused abruptly.</p>
			<p>A long silence followed, broken at last by Master Ambrose. ‚ÄúWell, Nat,‚Äù he said, ‚ÄúI think I‚Äôve had a lesson in humility. I used to have as good an opinion of myself as most men, I think, but now I‚Äôve learned that I‚Äôm a very ordinary sort of fellow, made of very inferior clay to you and my Moonlove‚ÅÝ‚Äîall the things that you know at first hand and I can only take on faith.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúSuppose, Ambrose, that what we know at first hand is only this‚ÅÝ‚Äîthat there is nothing to know?‚Äù said Master Nathaniel a little sadly. Then he sank into a brown study, and Master Ambrose, thinking he wanted to be alone, stole quietly from the room.</p>
			<p>Master Nathaniel sat gazing moodily into the fire; and his pipe went out without his noticing it. Then the door opened softly, and someone stole in and stood behind his chair. It was Dame Marigold. All she said was, ‚ÄúFunny old Nat!‚Äù but her voice had a husky tenderness. And then she knelt down beside him and took him into her soft warm arms. And a new hope was borne in upon Master Nathaniel that someday he would hear the Note again, and all would be clear.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
