<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-11" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XI</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">A Stronger Antidote Than Reason</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>Master Nathaniel sat at his old nurse’s feet for some minutes after she had stopped singing. Both his limbs and his mind seemed to be bathed in a cool, refreshing pool.</p>
			<p>So Endymion Leer and Hempie had reached by very different paths the same conclusion⁠—that, after all, there was nothing to be frightened about; that, neither in sky, sea, nor earth was there to be found a cavern dark and sinister enough to serve as a lair for <b>It</b>⁠—his secret fear.</p>
			<p>Yes, but there were facts as well as shadows. Against facts Hempie had given him no charm. Supposing that what had happened to Prunella should happen to Ranulph? That he should vanish forever across the Debatable Hills.</p>
			<p>But it had not happened yet⁠—nor should it happen as long as Ranulph’s father had wits and muscles.</p>
			<p>He might be a poor, useless creature when menaced by the figments of his own fancy. But, by the Golden Apples of the West, he would no longer sit there shaking at shadows, while, perhaps, realities were mustering their battalions against Ranulph.</p>
			<p>It was for him to see that Dorimare became a country that his son could live in in security.</p>
			<p>It was as if he had suddenly seen something white and straight⁠—a road or a river⁠—cutting through a sombre, moonlit landscape. And the straight, white thing was his own will to action.</p>
			<p>He sprang to his feet and took two or three paces up and down the room.</p>
			<p>“But I tell you, Hempie,” he cried, as if continuing a conversation, “they’re all against me. How can I work by myself! They’re all against me, I say.”</p>
			<p>“Get along with you, Master Nat!” jeered Hempie tenderly. “You were always one to think folks were against you. When you were a little boy it was always, ‘You’re not cross with me, Hempie, are you?’ and peering up at me with your little anxious eyes⁠—and there was me with no more idea of being cross with you than of jumping over the moon!”</p>
			<p>“But, I tell you, they are all against me,” he cried impatiently. “They blame me for what has happened, and Ambrose was so insulting that I had to tell him never to put his foot into my house again.”</p>
			<p>“Well, it isn’t the first time you and Master Ambrose have quarrelled⁠—and it won’t be the first time you make it up again. It was, ‘Hempie, Brosie won’t play fair!’ or ‘Hempie, it’s my turn for a ride on the donkey, and Nat won’t let me!’ And then, in a few minutes, it was all over and forgotten. So you must just step across to Master Ambrose’s, and walk in as if nothing had happened, and, you’ll see, he’ll be as pleased as Punch to see you.”</p>
			<p>As he listened, he realized that it would be very pleasant to put his pride in his pocket and rush off to Ambrose and say that he was willing to admit anything that Ambrose chose⁠—that he was a hopelessly inefficient Mayor, that his slothfulness during these past months had been criminal⁠—even, if Ambrose insisted, that he was an eater of, and smuggler of, and receiver of, fairy fruit, all rolled into one⁠—if only Ambrose would make friends again.</p>
			<p>Pride and resentment are not indigenous to the human heart; and perhaps it is due to the gardener’s innate love of the exotic that we take such pains to make them thrive.</p>
			<p>But Master Nathaniel was a self-indulgent man, and ever ready to sacrifice both dignity and expediency to the pleasure of yielding to a sentimental velleity.</p>
			<p>“By the Golden Apples of the West, Hempie,” he cried joyfully, “you’re right! I’ll dash across to Ambrose’s before I’m a minute older,” and he made eagerly for the door.</p>
			<p>On the threshold he suddenly remembered how he had seen the door of his chapel ajar, and he paused to ask Hempie if she had been up there recently, and had forgotten to lock it.</p>
			<p>But she had not been there since early spring.</p>
			<p>“That’s odd!” said Master Nathaniel.</p>
			<p>And then he dismissed the matter from his mind, in the exhilarating prospect of “making up” with Ambrose.</p>
			<p>It is curious what tricks a quarrel, or even a short absence, can play with our mental picture of even our most intimate friends. A few minutes later, as Master Ambrose looked at his old playmate standing at the door, grinning a little sheepishly, he felt as if he had just awakened from a nightmare. This was not “the most criminally negligent Mayor with whom the town of Lud-in-the-Mist had ever been cursed;” still less was it the sinister figure evoked by Endymion Leer. It was just queer old Nat, whom he had known all his life.</p>
			<p>Just as on a map of the country round Lud, in the zigzagging lines he could almost see the fish and rushes of the streams they represented, could almost count the milestones on the straight lines that stood for roads; so, with regard to the face of his old friend⁠—every pucker and wrinkle was so familiar that he felt he could have told you every one of the jokes and little worries of which they were the impress.</p>
			<p>Master Nathaniel, still grinning a little sheepishly, stuck out his hand. Master Ambrose frowned, blew his nose, tried to look severe, and then grasped the hand. And they stood there fully two minutes, wringing each other’s hand, and laughing and blinking to keep away the tears.</p>
			<p>And then Master Ambrose said, “Come into the pipe-room, Nat, and try a glass of my new flower-in-amber. You old rascal, I believe it was that that brought you!”</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>A little later when Master Ambrose was conducting Master Nathaniel back to his house, his arm linked in his, they happened to pass Endymion Leer.</p>
			<p>For a few seconds he stood staring after them as they glimmered down the lane beneath the faint moonlight. And he did not look overjoyed.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>That night was filled to the brim for Master Nathaniel with sweet, dreamless sleep. As soon as he laid his head on the pillow he seemed to dive into some pleasant unknown element⁠—fresher than air, more caressing than water; an element in which he had not bathed since he first heard the Note, thirty years ago. And he woke up the next morning lighthearted and eager; so fine a medicine was the will to action.</p>
			<p>He had been confirmed in it by his talk the previous evening with Master Ambrose. He had found his old friend by no means crushed by his grief. In fact, his attitude to the loss of Moonlove rather shocked Master Nathaniel, for he had remarked grimly that to have vanished forever over the hills was perhaps, considering the vice to which she had succumbed, the best thing that could have happened to her. There had always been something rather brutal about Ambrose’s common sense.</p>
			<p>But he was as anxious as Master Nathaniel himself that drastic measures should immediately be taken for stopping the illicit trade and arresting the smugglers. They had decided what these measures ought to be, and the following days were spent in getting them approved and passed by the Senate.</p>
			<p>Though the name of Master Nathaniel stank in the nostrils of his colleagues, their respect for the constitution was too deep seated to permit their opposing the Mayor of Lud-in-the-Mist and High Seneschal of Dorimare; besides, Master Ambrose Honeysuckle was a man of considerable weight in their councils, and they were not uninfluenced by the fact that he was the seconder of all the Mayor’s proposals.</p>
			<p>So a couple of Yeomen were placed at each of the gates of Lud, with orders to examine not only the baggage of everyone entering the town, but, as well, to rummage through every wagon of hay, every sack of flour, every frail of fruit or vegetables. As well, the West road was patrolled from Lud to the confines of the Elfin Marches, where a consignment of Yeomanry were sent to camp out, with orders day and night to watch the hills. And the clerk to the Senate was ordered to compile a dossier of every inhabitant of Lud.</p>
			<p>The energy displayed by Master Nathaniel in getting these measures passed did a good deal towards restoring his reputation among the townsfolk. Nevertheless that social barometer, Ebeneezor Prim, continued to send his new apprentice, instead of coming himself, to wind his clocks. And the grandfather clock, it would seem, was protesting against the slight. For according to the servants, it would suddenly move its hands rapidly up and down its dial, which made it look like a face, alternating between a smirk and an expression of woe. And one morning Pimple, the little indigo page, ran screaming with terror into the kitchen, for, he vowed, from the orifice at the bottom of the dial, there had suddenly come shooting out a green tongue like a lizard’s tail.</p>
			<p>As none of Master Nathaniel’s measures brought to light a single smuggler or a single consignment of fairy fruit, the Senate were beginning to congratulate themselves on having at last destroyed the evil that for centuries had menaced their country, when Mumchance discovered in one day three people clearly under the influence of the mysterious drug and with their mouth and hands stained with strangely coloured juices.</p>
			<p>One of them was a pigmy pedlar from the North, and as he scarcely knew a word of Dorimarite no information could be extracted from him as to how he had procured the fruit. Another was a little street urchin who had found some sherds in a dustbin, but was in too dazed a state to remember exactly where. The third was the deaf-mute known as Bawdy Bess. And, of course, no information could be got from a deaf-mute.</p>
			<p>Clearly, then, there was some leakage in the admirable system of the Senate.</p>
			<p>As a result, rebellious lampoons against the inefficient Mayor were found nailed to the doors of the Guildhall, and Master Nathaniel received several anonymous letters of a vaguely threatening nature, bidding him to cease to meddle with matters that did not concern him, lest they should prove to concern him but too much.</p>
			<p>But so well had the antidote of action been agreeing with his constitution that he merely flung them into the fire with a grim laugh and a vow to redouble his efforts.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
